[Music]
it was september 2nd 1859
people all over europe and north america
woke up at night
confused and still tired they were sure
it was already morning
it was so bright outside but when they
looked out of their windows
they discovered it wasn't sunlight
the skies were lit by countless intense
auroras
red green and purple they were so
brilliant
one could read a book as easily as in
the afternoon
auroras appeared even in the regions
where they had never been witnessed
before
like cuba the bahamas jamaica and hawaii
cool visual effects weren't the only
thing that both mesmerized and
horrified people the most high-tech
stuff at that time
telegraph wires shorted out throughout
europe and the us
sparks were flying from equipment and
many human operators got electric shocks
papers and telegraph offices burst into
flames
[Music]
all the machines were immediately
disconnected from their batteries
and still they mysteriously kept sending
broken messages
fires ignited by short circuits spread
over large areas
colorful lights kept dancing overhead
all this caused panic and total
confusion
earth's inhabitants had never seen or
experienced
anything like that before at that time
very few people knew that the sun was to
blame for the chaos
one of them was english astronomer
richard carrington
at about 11 a.m on september 1st the man
was standing by a telescope in his
private observatory
he was watching sunspots on the surface
of the sun
suddenly two patches of intense white
light broke out
they looked as bright as direct sunlight
at that moment
the astronomer didn't know what a
terrible commotion these flares would
cause
later it became clear that the sun had
produced an
epic geomagnetic storm
and unleashed it at our planet's
protective layer
wave after wave of charged particles
slammed into earth's atmosphere
the planet's magnetic field wasn't
powerful enough to stop them
it gave way and the storm hit earth
causing
havoc the phenomenon got the name of the
carrington event
so far it's been the worst solar storm
ever recorded
good thing it happened when people
didn't have advanced technologies
and weren't that vulnerable to the sun's
geomagnetic fury
the 1859 solar storm was three times
more powerful than the one that happened
on march 13th
1989. three days before it began
astronomers watched a massive eruption
on the sun's surface
within a couple of minutes a billion ton
cloud of gas
was hurled away from the star it rushed
straight toward our planet
at a speed of millions of miles per hour
on monday the 12th
the huge mass of solar plasma reached
earth's magnetic field
this storm was so fierce it lit
spectacular auroras and created
underground electric currents
beneath north america
these currents must have found some
weaknesses in the power grid of quebec
canada
in less than three minutes the entire
city lost
power millions of people found
themselves in pitch black streets
dark buildings and stuck elevators they
woke up
in freezing cold homes unable to cook
breakfast
the following 12-hour blackout closed
businesses
airports and schools the montreal metro
was also shut
in the u.s hundreds of power grids
started to have problems
minutes after the storm hit earth's
surface
luckily none of these issues led to a
blackout
the storm was severe enough to disrupt
satellite communication systems
and radio signals some space satellites
tumbled out of control for a few hours
lots of them had mysterious problems
that went away as soon as the storm
began to subside
no newspaper mentioned it but in 2012
earth had a close shave after narrowly
missing an extreme solar storm
the most intense in the past 150 years
on july 23rd astronomers at space
weather prediction center in colorado
spotted two clouds of energetic
particles
they erupted from the sun's surface and
barreled into space
just 19 hours later these clouds zoomed
past the spot
our planet had just left if the solar
eruption had happened several days
earlier
earth would have ended up in the line of
fire
so what if a solar storm as powerful as
the iconic
carrington event happened nowadays how
much more harm would it cause
would our life get back on track after
such a disaster
before you learn the answers to these
questions let's figure out what a solar
storm is
the sun is a gigantic constantly
changing ball of molten gases
every once in a while it spews out
bursts of energy
solar flares they often go hand in hand
with something called
coronal mass ejections those are giant
bubbles of ionized gas
that can speed up to more than 600 miles
per second
the most powerful volcanic eruptions
pale in comparison with solar flares
that release 10 million times more
energy
within a few minutes one solar flare can
give out
billions of tons of charged particles
solar flares are also
insanely hot with the temperatures
reaching several million
degrees fahrenheit astronomers believe
that such bursts of solar radiation
happen when the sun's magnetic field
gets twisted
in some regions at one moment all the
pent-up energy
is released the star sends out light and
particles
mostly electrons and protons most solar
flares
last for minutes but some continue for
hours
scientists classify solar flares
depending on how brightly they shine
in x-rays you aren't likely to notice
the tiniest flares if you don't have
special equipment
medium solar flares lead to fleeting
radio blackouts at the poles
but nothing too serious it's x-class
flares people should worry about
they cause the strongest and longest
lasting solar storms
when people think about danger coming
from space
most of them imagine an approaching
asteroid like the one that wiped out the
dinosaurs
but apparently we should be much more
worried about our good old sun
a super strong solar storm heading
toward earth won't happen at once
first there will be high energy sunlight
mostly ultraviolet rays
and x-rays they will ionize our planet's
upper atmosphere
and mess up radio communication after
that
a radiation storm will hit earth and
finally
several days later a colossal cloud of
charged solar
particles will reach our atmosphere the
particles will
interact with the planet's magnetic
field and wreak havoc
all over the world if an intense solar
storm happened these days
it would start by disrupting gps and
knocking out satellites
if any astronauts were space walking at
that moment
they would have a mere minutes after the
first flash of light to find
shelter their spacecraft would likely be
properly shielded and safe enough the
main challenge
would be to get inside in time
after that the storm will proceed to
interfere with satellite communications
that's why tons of your daily activities
from calling your friends to paying with
your credit card would be at risk
but one of the worst consequences would
be connected with power grids
power surges caused by the particles
coming from the sun would damage giant
transformers
those take ages to replace especially if
hundreds or even
thousands get wrecked in some places a
failure of one power grid
would make others collapse as well
creating a domino-like reaction
picture living without electricity for a
day a month
a year no light
no computers no phones water supply
systems out of order
no food in supermarkets plus without
electricity
it would be next to impossible to reboot
the already failed power grids
a powerful solar storm would cost people
one trillion to two trillion dollars
and that's just during the first year
after it happens it would take the world
another 4 to 10
years to recover the damage to all kinds
of satellites alone
would reach 70 billion under majestic
auroras
people would have to get used to a new
dramatically different
lifestyle no doubt we'd have some kind
of warning
modern equipment all over the world and
in space doesn't stop watching the sun
even for a second once a bad solar storm
happens
people would have some time to prepare
between several hours and a couple of
days
and if transformers are taken offline in
time the consequences
won't be so dramatic now the following
news
might sound scary there are also super
flares
in comparison to them our sun's burst of
radiation
are small potatoes super flares mostly
occur in young and active stars
in 2016 astronomers saw such a
phenomenon
a star 1500 light years away from earth
produced a flare
that was 10 billion times more powerful
than
any of those that burst from our sun
it doesn't mean we're safe here on earth
even our middle-aged son
knows how to produce super flares but
while young stars can have them once a
week
or even more often for the sun it's once
in a few thousand years
and still if people don't figure out how
to protect the planet
just one super flare can shred our ozone
layer
and wipe out life on earth
you